README.md, before:

# `phpfmt`

*The opinionated PHP code formatter powered by Go—think `gofmt`, but for PHP.*

[![Go Version](https://img.shields.io/github/go-mod/go-version/mibk/phpfmt)](https://golang.org)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/mibk/phpfmt)](LICENSE)

> **TL;DR**	Run `phpfmt -w .` and stop arguing about code style. \
> **Status**	Beta – already production-ready for many teams,
> but we still expect to receive reports of edge cases.

## Why `phpfmt`?

 1. **Zero-config, one true style** – `phpfmt` enforces a single canonical layout
    so you never waste time on bikeshedding.
 2. **Fast & memory-safe** – written in Go,
    typically formats thousands of lines in a fraction of a second.
 3. **Up-to-date PHP** – full syntax support for PHP 5.6 → 8.4
    (includes enums, attributes, readonly, etc.).
 4. **Tabs over spaces** – indentation is done with hard tabs only.
    *(Yes, we know.)*
 5. **Neat column alignment** – e.g., key ⇒ value array literals
    or `const NAME = VALUE` blocks are aligned into tidy columns.

## Installation

    go install mibk.dev/phpfmt@latest

## Usage

Format a specific file and write the result to standard output:

    phpfmt [file.php]

Format and overwrite a file in-place:

    phpfmt -w [file.php]

Format all PHP files in the current directory and its subdirectories:

    phpfmt -w .

## Precedence-aware operator spacing

A hallmark feature of **`phpfmt`** is that it uses whitespace to visually encode *operator precedence*.
Tight-binding operators are glued together; looser ones are padded with spaces.
This mirrors Go’s `gofmt` and makes complex expressions readable at a glance—often surfacing subtle bugs.

### Arithmetic & bitwise precedence

```diff
-echo $x ** 3 * 4;
-$x = 3 + 4 * 5;
+echo $x**3 * 4;
+$x = 3 + 4*5;

// & binds tighter than |
-$x = $a | ($b ^ $c) & $d;
+$x = $a | ($b ^ $c)&$d;
```

### Unary `!` vs `instanceof`

Many codebases put a space after every unary `!`—`if (! $cond)`.
**`phpfmt`** keeps the operator *tight* (`!$cond`) everywhere
*except* when the operand starts with an `instanceof` expression.
The extra space visually signals that `instanceof` binds tighter than `!`,
i.e. the code is parsed as `!($expr instanceof Foo)` rather than `(! $expr) instanceof Foo`.

```diff
-if(!$foo->name instanceof Foo\Id){
+if (! $foo->name instanceof Foo\Id) {
     // ...
 }
```

### Spotting bugs with whitespace

```diff
// The exponent operator has higher precedence than unary minus.
-$x = -$a ** 3;
+$x = - $a**3;

// Comparison binds tighter than XOR.
-if ($a^0x0F !== 0);
+if ($a ^ 0x0F!==0);

// === binds tighter than &.
-if ($dir->perm & 01 === 0);
+if ($dir->perm & 01===0);

// Logical || binds tighter than ??.
-$a || $b ?? (string) $c;
+$a||$b ?? (string)$c;

// But the keyword `and` is lower than ??.
-$a and $b ?? (string) $c;
+$a and $b??(string)$c;
```

## Examples of formatted code in the wild

| Project  | Commit                                                         |
| -------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Composer | [`4abf4f90`](https://github.com/mibk/composer/commit/4abf4f90) |
| PHPStan  | [`a31cb411`](https://github.com/mibk/phpstan/commit/a31cb411)  |
| Laravel  | [`cfa7ef31`](https://github.com/mibk/laravel/commit/cfa7ef31)  |
| Doctrine | [`9e31f713`](https://github.com/mibk/doctrine/commit/9e31f713) |

Those commits were generated by running nothing more than `phpfmt -w .`
over the respective code-bases.

## Contributing

The style of `phpfmt` is not set in stone—yet.
The goal of this project is to create a universal, standardized format for PHP files.
If you have a suggestion for a better style, we encourage you to submit a proposal.
Please open an issue to discuss your proposal.

## License

`phpfmt` is released under the [MIT License](LICENSE).

Commit message:

README.md: Mention PHP version awareness

README.md, after:

# `phpfmt`

*The opinionated PHP code formatter powered by Go—think `gofmt`, but for PHP.*

[![Go Version](https://img.shields.io/github/go-mod/go-version/mibk/phpfmt)](https://golang.org)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/mibk/phpfmt)](LICENSE)

> **TL;DR**	Run `phpfmt -w .` and stop arguing about code style. \
> **Status**	Beta – already production-ready for many teams,
> but we still expect to receive reports of edge cases.

## Why `phpfmt`?

 1. **Zero-config, one true style** – `phpfmt` enforces a single canonical layout
    so you never waste time on bikeshedding.
 2. **Fast & memory-safe** – written in Go,
    typically formats thousands of lines in a fraction of a second.
 3. **Up-to-date PHP** – full syntax support for PHP 5.6 → 8.4
    (includes enums, attributes, readonly, etc.).
 4. **Tabs over spaces** – indentation is done with hard tabs only.
    *(Yes, we know.)*
 5. **Neat column alignment** – e.g., key ⇒ value array literals
    or `const NAME = VALUE` blocks are aligned into tidy columns.

## Installation

    go install mibk.dev/phpfmt@latest

## Usage

Format a specific file and write the result to standard output:

    phpfmt [file.php]

Format and overwrite a file in-place:

    phpfmt -w [file.php]

Format all PHP files in the current directory and its subdirectories:

    phpfmt -w .

## Precedence-aware operator spacing

A hallmark feature of **`phpfmt`** is that it uses whitespace to visually encode *operator precedence*.
Tight-binding operators are glued together; looser ones are padded with spaces.
This mirrors Go’s `gofmt` and makes complex expressions readable at a glance—often surfacing subtle bugs.

### Arithmetic & bitwise precedence

```diff
-echo $x ** 3 * 4;
-$x = 3 + 4 * 5;
+echo $x**3 * 4;
+$x = 3 + 4*5;

// & binds tighter than |
-$x = $a | ($b ^ $c) & $d;
+$x = $a | ($b ^ $c)&$d;
```

### Unary `!` vs `instanceof`

Many codebases put a space after every unary `!`—`if (! $cond)`.
**`phpfmt`** keeps the operator *tight* (`!$cond`) everywhere
*except* when the operand starts with an `instanceof` expression.
The extra space visually signals that `instanceof` binds tighter than `!`,
i.e. the code is parsed as `!($expr instanceof Foo)` rather than `(! $expr) instanceof Foo`.

```diff
-if(!$foo->name instanceof Foo\Id){
+if (! $foo->name instanceof Foo\Id) {
     // ...
 }
```

### Spotting bugs with whitespace

```diff
// The exponent operator has higher precedence than unary minus.
-$x = -$a ** 3;
+$x = - $a**3;

// Comparison binds tighter than XOR.
-if ($a^0x0F !== 0);
+if ($a ^ 0x0F!==0);

// === binds tighter than &.
-if ($dir->perm & 01 === 0);
+if ($dir->perm & 01===0);

// Logical || binds tighter than ??.
-$a || $b ?? (string) $c;
+$a||$b ?? (string)$c;

// But the keyword `and` is lower than ??.
-$a and $b ?? (string) $c;
+$a and $b??(string)$c;
```

### PHP version awareness

`phpfmt` is PHP version aware.
It automatically reads the required PHP version from `composer.json`.
It adjusts formatting based on the PHP version,
especially for operator precedence changes and trailing commas.
For example, the `.` operator's precedence changed in PHP 8.0.

In **PHP 7.4**, where `.` and `+` had the same precedence, `phpfmt` outputs:

```php
echo 'Sum: ' . $a + $b;
echo 'Shift: '.$a << 2;
```

For **PHP 8.0**, where both `+` and `<<` bind more tightly than `.`,
`phpfmt` adjusts the spacing to make this clear:

```php
echo 'Sum: ' . $a+$b;
echo 'Shift: ' . $a<<2;
```

## Examples of formatted code in the wild

| Project  | Commit                                                         |
| -------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Composer | [`4abf4f90`](https://github.com/mibk/composer/commit/4abf4f90) |
| PHPStan  | [`a31cb411`](https://github.com/mibk/phpstan/commit/a31cb411)  |
| Laravel  | [`cfa7ef31`](https://github.com/mibk/laravel/commit/cfa7ef31)  |
| Doctrine | [`9e31f713`](https://github.com/mibk/doctrine/commit/9e31f713) |

Those commits were generated by running nothing more than `phpfmt -w .`
over the respective code-bases.

## Contributing

The style of `phpfmt` is not set in stone—yet.
The goal of this project is to create a universal, standardized format for PHP files.
If you have a suggestion for a better style, we encourage you to submit a proposal.
Please open an issue to discuss your proposal.

## License

`phpfmt` is released under the [MIT License](LICENSE).
